Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we're moving
towards establishing calculus in a very elementary
way using only high school algebra that's at
the year nine or year ten level today we're
to talk about tangent lines and tangent conics
to poly numbers or polynomials we haven't yet
introduced the connection between polynomials
and poly numbers and geometry so there are no
pictures as yet to connect with these notions
I'm doing that on purpose because I want to
emphasize to you that what we're doing here is
completely 100% algebraic in our next video we
are going to talk about pictures and we need
to reduce diagrams that illustrate some of
the computations we're going to make today
so let me remind you that about the notion
of the degree of a polynomial or a poly number
here's a poly number P in our standard form a 0
plus a 1 alpha all the way up to a and alpha
to the N and if this top coefficient here is
nonzero then we'll say that the degree of P is
n there's one slightly ambiguous case when you
have a poly number which is the 0 polynomial
where a 0 is in that case strictly speaking
that object there is not nonzero so it's not
clear what the degree should be so we say that
the degree of 0 is undefined however if you
have a constant polynomial such as P equals
5 then it's degree would be 0 because the first
nonzero term occur isn't in the in the order of 0
now we're going to introduce some notation
that distinguishes the relative complexity
of polynomials of the different degrees degree
one polynomial will be called linear we'll say
that a polynomial or ippolit number is quadratic
precisely when it's degree is 2 degree three is
cubic degree four quartic degree five quintic now
we could keep going a little bit of a special case
the actually the zeros case when the degree of
P is zero then we'll say that P is a constant
polynomial or a constant Pauline umber and
will also include the case when P is equal
to zero polynomial itself that's also a constant
polynomial even though as we remarked its degree
is not officially anything at all so we have
this idea now that poly numbers come in sort
of levels of complexity the higher the degree
generally speaking the more complicated the
poly number is the more subtle its arithmetic
is the more complicated The Associated geometry
is going to turn out to be so this is a kind
of a hierarchy that the higher the degree is
the more complicated things get a consequence
of that way of thinking is that if we have
a high degree polynomial to simplify it by
casting away some of the higher order terms
we would then get some simpler poly numbers
associated to the bigger one this is a very
interesting and useful idea the idea that we
might be able to get simpler polynomials from
a given polynomial by truncating it my truncate
we mean we just take some initial part of the
poly number so the official definition if
P is this probably number here same one
as we've been talking about then for any
K 0 1 2 up to n like 8th tangent of P at
0 is this new poly number that you get by just
going up to the degree K terms and no further
it's a truncation of the original Pauline umber
and we're giving it as something of a fancy name
we're calling a tangent of P and for a reason
which is not perhaps too clear as yet but will
become clearer later we're saying that this is a
tangent of P at 0 now we can do this at level 0
so that would be the 0th tangent if we just
chopped off everything and just left a 0 if
we chopped off everything beyond here just that
would be the linear part that would be the first
tangent this would be the second tangent and we
can keep going all the way up to well the whole
thing which would be the nth tangent that would
be all of P itself we wouldn't have lost anything
in that case so here's a particular example if
P is 8 minus 5 alpha plus 4 alpha cubed minus
alpha to the fourth then the 0th tangent of
P at 0 is 8 we just take the terms of degree
zero the first tangent of P at 0 is 8 minus 5
alpha the second tangent of P is also 8 minus
5 alpha because there are no alpha squared terms
here or we can say another way we could say the
Alpha squared term here has coefficient 0 so if
we include that we're not getting anything more
than we got at this stage so it's possible
for these two tangents of P to be the same
and the third tangent is what we get when we
go all the way up to degree three it's eight
minus five alpha plus 4 alpha cubed and I didn't
write down the fourth tangent the fourth tangent
would be all of P so the polynomial P has these
different tangents at zero so it turns out that
we can define tangents at other points or values
to not just zero that's going to be a very useful
thing for us to do so how are we going to do that
we're going to do that by rewriting the Taylor by
poly number let's stick with this example here
that's quite familiar to us P equals eight minus
five alpha plus 4 alpha cubed minus alpha to
the fourth here is the taylor by poly number
which we've seen several times and just what
you get when you replace alpha with alpha plus
beta that's all and then we can evaluate that by
essentially expanding out these powers of alpha
plus beta and the easiest way to do that is to
use the Pascal's arraign just to multiply the
diagonals of the Pascal's array by the various
coefficients here if we do that and then organize
things so that we have powers of beta increasing
then we get this expression here which we've seen
before there's the original Pauline umber there's
its first sub derivative second sub derivative
third sub derivative fourth sub derivative now
what we haven't done before and what I'm going
to do now is introduce a little bit of a twist the
Taylor by Pauli number is symmetrical in alpha and
beta so we can write it not just this way but
we can write it in exactly the same form with
the alphas and betas interchanged that should be
just as reasonable thing to do because the thing
is symmetric in Alpha and Beta so from here to
here nothing but just interchanging alphas and
betas but the interpretation quite different
what we're going to do now is think of this
as being a poly number in which the beta can be
replaced with a number C a particular integer C
we're working here with integral poly numbers
for now and so when we talk about numbers here
typically they'll always be integers although the
same discussion will also work with other kinds of
poly numbers as we'll see later on okay so for
example suppose that beta we agree is going to
be replaced with 1 then this whole expression here
is P of alpha plus 1 on this side equals well what
does this become if beta is equal to 1 well here
we would have to evaluate this we would have to 8
minus 5 plus 4 minus 1 that's 6 and minus 5 plus
12 minus 4 is 3 and 12 minus 6 is 6 4 minus 4 is
0 so there's no alpha cube term and minus 1 alpha
to the fourth so this is just an identity this is
a true fact that if you take this poly number
and you evaluate it at alpha plus 1 in other
words replace alpha without the plus 1 and expand
out you're gonna get this new looking object so
this is a translate of P by 1 so what we is not P
itself this is a translate of P to the left by one
we're going to do something rather interesting now
to this formula that we've just obtained so here
it is again P alpha plus 1 equals 6 plus 3 alpha
plus 6 alpha squared minus alpha to the fourth
what we're going to do is we're going to replace
alpha here with alpha minus 1 with the idea of
recovering P of alpha on the left hand side so
P of alpha is just the original Pauline umber
that we started with when we replace alpha with
alpha minus 1 here we also have to replace it with
alpha minus 1 here and here and here so we get a
new formula that says that the original Pauline
umber P is written as 6 plus 3 alpha minus 1 plus
6 alpha minus 1 squared minus alpha minus 1 to the
fourth have a very good look at this what have we
done we have rewritten the poly number so that it
is not expressed as a sum of powers of alpha
but rather as a sum of powers of alpha minus 1
something but something times alpha minus 1
plus something times alpha minus 1 squared
plus something times alpha minus 1 cubed plus
something times alpha minus 1 to the fourth
now I think it's a good exercise for you to
check this to make sure that this is actually
a true statement that if you expand this all out
just using the standard laws for manipulation of
polynomials or poly numbers that you will recover
the original Pauline umber P okay so that might be
a good exercise to do so we're going to use this
formula to define the caithe tangent to p at 1 so
how are we going to do that and I just reminded
you what the original Pauline umber P was there
right so we're gonna take you this expression
here and we're going to view it in the same
way as what we did when we were truncating the
original Pauline umber the zero tangent is what
we get when we just take the degree 0 term here
which is 6 the first tangent is what we get when
we just take the linear part or the part of degree
up to 1 6 plus 3 alpha minus 1 now we can expand
that out and rewrite it as 3 plus 3 alpha the
second tangent to P at 1 he is what we get when
we take this and we go up to degree two terms so
we truncate everything past here we have 6 plus
3 alpha minus 1 plus 6 alpha minus 1 squared and
here I've expanded that out and collected terms
so it simplifies to 9 minus 9 alpha plus 6 alpha
squared the third one when we go up to degree 3
well it's going to be the same as the one degree
2 because there are no cubic powers of alpha minus
1 there we get 4 tangents to P at 1 we're going
to give these some names or interpret them first
of all the zeroth one is just the value of P at
what if you plug one into here you're going to
get 6 so the significance of this is this is the
value of P at the point 1 that we're considering
this first tangent we're going to give it an
alternate name what I call it the tangent line
of P at 1 and the second one well we're going to
call that the tangent conic of P at 1 this third
one well to follow the pattern we would call it
the tangent cubic of P at 1 but in fact it's not
actually a cubic at all because it doesn't have
any degree three terms so we'll be a little bit
ambiguous we won't call that anything yet but
this will be the tangent line of P at 1 this is
the tangent conic of P at 1 these are absolutely
fundamental constructions in the differential
calculus the differential calculus is all about
these kinds of approximations to paly numbers and
other more general objects but if you understand
the story for poly numbers or polynomials then
the higher order stuff falls naturally into place
in fact it's some sense not such an extension the
heart of the algebraic aspect is contained here
in the poly number case so if you have taken a
course in calculus before you will of course have
studied tangent lines to curves or to functions
you probably will not have studied tangent conics
very much that might be kind of a new idea for
you it's actually a very interesting idea it's
underrated the idea let's put it that way and
we're going to see the importance of tangent
conics a little bit later but if you haven't
studied calculus before you might say well ok we
can do this we can play this game but what what's
the point what what do we gain ok well here's
a very natural and good answer to what we can
gain by studying tangents to paly numbers the
point is that we can approximate evaluations of
pauly numbers let's illustrate again by sticking
with our standard example of P like there and I'm
just reminding you that at C equals 0 the various
tangents were these that was the zero of tangent
that was the first tangent there was also the
second tangent and the third tangent was that
suppose we want to evaluate P of 0.03 a purely
arithmetic 'el issue we want to plug 0.03 into
this expression here that we want to compute it
suppose we don't have a calculator we have to do
this by hand well I'll tell you what the answer
is okay here's the actual answer right here seven
point eight five zero one zero seven one nine you
plug this thing into here and that's what you get
but you might not be interested in knowing this to
eight decimal places you might just be interested
in knowing it to the closest integer or to one
or two decimal places this might represent a
level of magnification that's uninteresting to you
well that happens in practice quite a lot and the
tangents of the poly number help us in evaluating
so let's see how let's take the zero tangent the
simplest one which is just what we get when we
throw everything away except for the constant
term that's eight if we take that thing which is
a poly number and we evaluated at zero point zero
three well we just get eight so that's kind of
a naive initial approximation to what P of this
thing is because this number is pretty close to
zero the idea is that this number is pretty close
to zero so alpha is pretty small alpha cubed is
even smaller alpha to the fourth is even smaller
so these things here will be relatively small and
the main term here that will contribute to the sum
will be the eight that's very good thinking okay
we can go one step further we can go to the first
tangent which is eight minus five alpha so we'll
take that poly number and plug in alpha equals
zero point zero three so we take eight minus
five times zero point zero three we evaluate
that with our pencil and paper we get seven point
eight five that's a little bit of a better answer
than the first one because we've taken more terms
of the whole thing our error is smaller the error
that we've dropping are these two terms one step
further to the third I forgets it's two steps
because one step further would be the second
tangent which is the same as the first tangent
but if we go to the third tangent which is eight
minus five alpha plus 4 alpha cubed and evaluate
it at zero point zero three do the calculation
we get seven point eight five zero one zero
eight that's yet a closer approximation now we've
only dropped one term we've just disregarded the
Alpha to the fourth and the actual value when
we calculate all the whole thing including the
the point zero three to the fourth is this number
here so you can see that because the point zero
three happened to be close to zero plugging it
into the various tangents gave us approximations
to the actual value and for many purposes those
approximations would be good enough and would
relieve us of the need to make a computation that
was more complicated than it had to be so that was
fun let's do another example let's stick with the
same upon a number P but now we're going to try to
approximate P of one point zero seven this number
is pretty close to one and it's not so close to
zero now so if we just plug this into here and
we ignore say the last two terms then we'll have
a reasonably big error we will not have a very
good approximation and that's because in some
sense this poly number the way it's written now
is geared to the point zero because it's powers
of alpha which gets small as alpha approaches 0
this value is close to 1 and so what we're going
to be looking at is rewriting the poly number in
such a way that it's now in powers of alpha minus
1 we've already done that ok that was what we did
when we calculated the various tangents to P at 1
so we took this thing here and we took various
truncations of it to get the zero tangent at
one the first tangent at one the second tangent
one which is also the third tangent so let's use
these things as approximations to the true value
of P which is all of this let's plug in one point
zero seven first into the zero of tangent
we plug that in doesn't matter what it is
we're going to get six that's an approximate
value to P of one point zero seven a better
approximation with the first tangent which
is 3 plus 3 alpha we plug in one point zero
seven we get six point two one that's now a
better approximation has two decimal places
the second tangent which happens to also be the
same as the third tangent he is nine minus 9 alpha
plus six alpha squared when we plug 1.07 into that
we have to make this calculation okay we can do
that we get six point two three nine four we have
now four decimal places we have more accuracy than
we did here and we see that we're still in
the same general ballpark but it's getting
more accurate and of course we should compare
it to the actual value if you actually take
the whole poly number and you plug in one point
zero seven so going right back to the start and
evaluate it yet six point two three nine three
seven five nine nine that's the exact answer
this is a pretty good approximation that's not
quite so good that's not quite so good but all
of them are pretty decent and why does it work it
works because first of all one point zero seven
is pretty close to one and secondly because
we're essentially using this representation
P the fact that we've essentially rewritten it
as something involving powers of alpha minus 1
rather than powers of alpha and why is that good
that's good because if this number is pretty close
to 1 then the difference between alpha and 1 is
small like close to zero and so when we square
it when we take its fourth power we're going to
getting something that's small so that means this
representation is ideal when we're evaluating
the poly number at a value which is close to 1
this representation is good when we're evaluating
for an alpha close to zero and I think you can see
the idea if we were evaluating at some number
that was close to 7 then we would want to look
for another representation of the same poly
number in power is essentially of alpha minus
7 so we've looked at this poly number with the
special constants 0 and 1 but we could just as
well have looked at other constants C equals 7
or C equals minus 5 so we want to get a sense
of well how does this actually work somewhat
more generally so often things are clarified
when we look at them not in very special cases
but somewhat in more generality so let's look
at what we've been doing from a little bit more
of a bird's eye view what's really going on well
we've started with a Pauline umber P now let's
assume we have a general Pauline umber a 0 plus
a 1 alpha all the way up to a and alpha to the N
the basic object in some sense that starts this
entire discussion is the taylor by poly number
what we get when we replace alpha with alpha plus
beta when we do that and write it out in terms of
powers of beta then the various coefficients are
going to be themselves polynomials and alpha
or poly numbers in alpha and the various poly
numbers that we're getting here are the sub
derivatives of P the zero sub derivative of
P which is P itself the first sub derivative of
P which is the same as the derivative of P then
the second sub derivative the third sub derivative
all the way up to the nth sub derivative okay so
now what we're doing in today's lecture is we're
turning this around we're taking this equation and
replacing the alphas and the beta's so instead
of having powers of beta increasing here we now
have powers of alpha increasing and now these
coefficients instead of being poly numbers in
alpha they are now poly numbers in beta so I'll
make that explicit by writing d0p of beta d1 of
P of beta all the way up to DN of P of beta these
are the various sub derivatives evaluated at beta
instead of alpha because we're interchanging
the alphas and the beta's so that's just the
tailor by poly number and sort of rewritten okay
so what did we do then and our examples well we
let beta be now a constant number instead
of being a poly number we're replacing it
or evaluating it at a number C C is for us an
integer since we're working here all over the
integers so we're just going to rewrite this
formula with beta replaced with C P of alpha
plus C equals D 0 of P of C plus D 1 of P of C
times alpha plus and I put in the next term D
sub 2 of P of C times alpha squared all the way
up to D sub n of P of C times alpha to the N
that's quite a nice formula right you should
stare at that formula but we're going to modify
it a little bit to make it a little bit more
familiar we're going to replace alpha now with
alpha minus C so we're to translate this formula
so if we replace alpha here with alpha minus C
then on the left hand side we'll just have P of
alpha which is of course the original Pauline
umber we started with namely that thing there what
happens to the right hand side well we just have
to go through and replace all the alphas with
alpha minus C so we get D 0 of P of C plus D 1
of P of C times alpha minus C plus D 2 of P of
C times alpha minus C squared plus all the way
up to DN of P of C evaluated at alpha minus C to
the end we want to give us a name this is a very
important expression in calculus it's something
that first-year students agonize over many of them
never learned properly partly it's because they're
not told the right way of thinking about it and in
fact they're not even given the right sort of
formulation this is a superior formulation to
the one that you find in calculus texts because
it involves the sub derivatives rather than the
powers of the derivative it's the Taylor expansion
of P at C but because we've written it with sub
derivatives there are no factorials floating
around in the denominators so we don't have
to do rational arithmetic we're doing integer
arithmetic so if you have taken calculus before
flag that point okay it's really the same formula
as the Taylor expansion that you were used to but
it's written differently because these are sub
derivatives rather than powers of the derivative
as a result there are no there's no 1 factorial
2 factorial n factorial in the denominators here
this is all over the integers ok so this is a
great formula it's a very general formula it
includes the various formulas that we've already
looked at in special cases so we've had a look at
the special case when P was that polynomial 8
minus 5 alpha plus whatever it was for alphas
cubed minus alpha to the fourth whatever we
looked at that case with the special case when
C was equal to 0 and also the special case when
C was equal to 1 here is the general case for a
general polynomial and for a general constant C
so this has been an important lecture we covered a
big chunk of vitally crucial material in a first
calculus course relating to derivatives Taylor
polynomials Taylor expansions use of those things
for approximating functions don't be afraid to to
go over it several times especially perhaps if you
have already studied calculus this may be a little
bit unfamiliar way an unfamiliar approach to the
subject but you should be confident that we're
proceeding away which is logically completely
clear it's only high school algebra one step
at a time so I do really want you to get what
we've been doing today under your belt and so
I'm going to insist strongly ok that you do this
exercise even if it's all clear to you doing the
exercise will solidify it in your mind because
this is a novel way of thinking about things and
so if solidification is necessary what I want you
to do is to look at this particular Pauline umber
or polynomial it's a cubic because it's a degree
3 5 minus 3 alpha minus 4 Alpha squared plus alpha
cubed and I want you to do pretty well all of
the things that we've been talking about first
find the taylor by poly number of this thing
and I remind you that the easiest way of doing
that is to exploit the fact that you know the
Pascal array you just multiplying diagonals of
the Pascal array by these four numbers and then
adding up what you've got organizing what you've
got find the sub derivatives of this poly number
D 0 D 1 D 2 D 3 you can think about what higher
subdivisions will be find the K tangents of P
at at 0 K equals 0 1 2 etc then find the Taylor
expansion of P at a number of different points see
that's equals 1 that's equal to s equals minus 1
so find the K tangents of P at C at these three
points that's equals 1 to minus 1 so for each one
of these points you'll have a zeros tangent
the first tangent the second tangent a third
tangent so on and then use those various things
to find approximations for let's say you had to
evaluate this thing at point zero two or one point
zero five or 0.97 or two point zero three or one
point nine four or minus one point zero zero one
all right so I want you to go over the lecture
solidify by writing down nice neat you know book
careful write down solutions to these things
if you do that and if you're enthusiastic you can
try it for some other polynomials you can make up
your own polynomial work things out right it's by
working things out that we understand what's going
on and we start saying actually this is quite
easy this is so Elementary why did nobody tell
us before that calculus was so easy okay next time
we're going to supply a missing aspect to this
discussion we've been doing algebra we haven't
had any pictures okay calculus is not just about
algebra there's many geometrical aspects to it as
we want to introduce some pictures to go with the
algebra that's gonna make us feel even better so
next time we're going to talk about visualizing or
graphing polynomials.I hope you will join me for
that, im Norman Wildberger. thanks for listening
first